# 104-10004-10143 C06932208

## Page 1

|104-10004-10143| [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
Date: 05/08/96
Page: 1
### : JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
### IDENTIFICATION FORM ,
### AGENCY INFORMATION
### AGENCY : CIA
### RECORD NUMBER : 104-10004-10143 |

RECORD SERIES : JFK oo
### AGENCY FILE NUMBER : 201-289248
### DOCUMENT INFORMATION
### ORIGINATOR : CIA :
### FROM : .
### TO :. :
### TITLE : DISCUSSION BETWEEN MEMBER SR DIVISION CONCERNING
### OSWALD'S STAY IN HELSINKI.
### DATE : 06/01/64
### PAGES : 2 |
### SUBJECTS : HELSINKI TRIP
### | USSR CONSULATE .
### DOCUMENT TYPE : PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT .
### CLASSIFICATION : SECRET
### RESTRICTIONS : 1B .
### CURRENT STATUS : RELEASED WITH DELETIONS
### DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 06/12/93
### OPENING CRITERIA :
### COMMENTS : OSW10:V43 1993.06.12.10:33:55:150000:
### : _ [R] + ITEM IS RESTRICTED

NW 64937 Docid:32106269 Page 1 |

## Page 2

CAF eNcLASSIFIED 7 Oates ie i MB ventiat [] SECRET
ee ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET ,
| SUBJECT: (Optional) ae : .
FROM: LLP A JP 5S a a | EXTENSION sy . 5 j 3 rom
20°" |
. / y ge
INITIALS to whom. Draw a line across column after each comment.)
“
oy 8 wR aa | w (Mor are
: | Sf ot |
| | A Bo~ 5
. |
5. ‘
### PS/LPL ; .

& | for FOIA Review on JUN 1976"
. . ef
nvicerosObQuseeateied Ba QESRET  ([] CONFIDENTIAL [[] Yse ony [| _ UNCLASSIFIED

## Page 3

. - i \e Sb
. rs
1 June 1964 - .
4 . : ‘or
‘ Oe .ussia" be tron ony BER S% 0 jv $0 A J
a bd COS polsink) concen ing Aimbrtedle
MEMO FOR THE RECORD yf OswAtdis Stay 7 et ° wBy .
za
° 1, At 0900 this morning I talked with Frank Friberg recently
returned COS Helsinki re Warren Commission inquiry concerning: ‘
the timetable of Oswald's Stay in Finland in October 1959, including ~
his contact with the Soviet Consulate there. (Copy of the Commission
letter of 25 May 64 and State Cable of 22 May 64 attached.) 2
2. Friberg gave me the following information: ;
a. It takes 25 minutes to drive from the airport to
" downtown Helsinki;
b. By taxi, it would take no more than 5 minutes to .
’ reach the Soviet consulate;
c. The Soviet consulate probably closéd at 1300 hours Jocal |
time on Saturdays in 1959; ,
. qd. Passenger lists (manifests) at the U.S. Consulate in :
Helsinki are retained for six months only and then are destroyed.
Mr. Robert Fulton (CIA) was U.S. consular official there at .
the time.
a ) -e. A copy of State's cable inquiry would go to the Helsinki ) Oo
Station and they would assist in preparation of a repty.
we 3. Mr. Friberg agreed that it would be worthwhile to cable che
Station concerning points not covered by State in their inquiry. He — oO
suggested changes incorporated into the cable sent to Helsinki. ; :
. ; - : , | a
Lee H. Wigren a, ae
LO C/SR/CI/R ee | #
- HEE oo _

: [ris | ___|Paerane FoR FILSeiG
- _ pre | (FH =

‘Document Number £1 ¥38 coe aw 2.8. |
, Tre rns ef
. . 1s0/D¢u CABLE IDEN (11) '
for FOIA Review on. JUN 1976 | eo)
eg ‘ IP/FILES {FOR FILING I _
te: - d € wo ’
4 poc ** = BHO ,
by oo,  D0\-28ag
pane ees? Docid:32106269 Page 3 i :

---

*Document converted by JFK Files PDF2Markdown converter at 2025-03-19 16:37:01*
*OCR: Enabled*
*Quality: high*
*GPT-assisted: No*
*Conversion time: 4.11 seconds*

