# 104-10004-10213

## Page 1

1404-10004-10213| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
; _ -¥ July 1964 : i
, oo MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ° . ) ; .
eS ’ . SUBJECT . : Discussion with Warren Commission Staff Member
7 REFERENCE: Letter from J. Lee Rankin, General Counsel of the
; , Presidcat's Commission, to Mr. Richard Helms .
. . . dated 3 July 1964 . Jo
TPO SRfer dysevssehs sith SLAW 4 Tely en _grstins. * |
Asie t_ pelicy dew inds Bissisar wears Hac rec sas awd.
See cers tes ees tee
I: ith ihe approval of C/SR and the DOP, I met.with Mr. W. °
David Slawson of the staff of the President's Commission on the ;
. Assassination of President Kennedy at 1400 hours on tris date in
the Commission's offices at 200 Maryland Avenue, N.E., Washington, ~
. D.C. The purpsse of this meeting was to discuss apparent inconsistencies -
in material provided the Commission by CIA asd ty the Departmens of ;
State which were called to our attention in a letter from the General :
Counsel of the Cummission to Mr. Helms, dated 3 July 1964. :
2. By way of introduction, Mr. Slawson said that in the portion of the | -
Commission's report that he was writing, he sould have to deal with the 7
question of whett.er or not the OSWALDs! depzrture {rom the USSR = and ;
‘the circumstances {i.e. timing) of that departure - were unusual or se
. suspicious in any way. He expressed his belief that the; probably were :
not and cited Soviet relaxation in such matters jn the post-Stalinera. — :
: However, he war.ted to be sure in his own mird that our information was : .
. not in conflict with that which the Commissior: had received from State
' since all of that information would remain in tee records of the
Commission. ; . , :
. 3. After stating my belief that. there was x9 real disagreement or
inconsistency betueen the information from CLA and that from State, I ‘
‘expressed the view that the matter resolved itseif into three questions: ; ,
, _ fa. Do the Soviet :
Oocument Number 161-36 4 ; oy
; for FOIA Review on JUN 1876 es topy ; a ;
CUA". - Stnef CARMAN GE

## Page 2

13-00000 vo
, . — a. Do the Soviet authorities normally permit Soviet :
a “eltizens married tu forcign nationals to emigrate from the — ne
_ Soviet Union tq the homelands of their spouses? so
oe ~ 7 ‘b. | Do they normally permit such Soviet citizens to. , .
: : accompany (i.e. depart simultaneously with) their spouses "lov :
7 from the Soviet Union? . EF SO,
. L ; c. How long does it take such Soviet citizens to get ~ :
. Soviet exit visas for such a purpose (time lapse from application :
_ | to granting of visas)? . ,
) 4. Concerning the first two questions Qa and 3b above) I pointed out . “tg
__- that we had addressed ourselves mainly to the question of Soviet citizens "|
_ being allowed to accompany their spouses abroad while State dealt only
. with the larger question of Sovicts married to foreigners being ailowed
. to emigrate without reference to whetner or not they left simultazeously
. with or at another time from their spouses. Mr. Slawson commented
; that this explanation was most helpful and he reread what both we and
State had said in that light.
5. By way of further explanation, I said that the statements in
; paragraph 6 of our memorandum of 6 April 1964 concerning Soviets being
. permitted to accompany their foreign spouses abroad were based on a
review of 26 cases, of which 10 involved Americans. . In only four of ~
these cascs did a Soviet wife leave the USSR in the company of ner foreign :
. husband; in 14 of the cases the foreign spouse departed alone; and in the
, ' remaining seven cases insufficient details are known to permit us to
categorize them. I added that although State's information began by |
citing the issuance of 724 quota and non-quota immigrant visas by the. ; ,
American Embassy in Moscow during the period FY 1954 to December
1903, it did not indicate how many of these visas were for Soviet citizens :
, who had married U.S. nationals. Actually State provided detailed
information for only sixteen cases and did not indicate in many of these
, whether or not the Soviet was permitted to accompany the foreign spouse.
) , /6. In response to .

## Page 3

13-00000
so " 6. In response ts a question from Mr. Slawsoa I stated that most
s of the 26 cases upon which we based Gur statements involved foreign
’ students, exchange teachers and other relatively transient persons, .
— , and while a number of cases have certain points im common, they bear
; ; ‘little similarity to the OSWALD case in that none imvolved a defector who -
; : married prior to rcpatriating. Inoted that paragraph 6 of our 6 April
: : 1964 memorandum to the Commission had pointed this out. Mr. Slawson
i ‘indicated that hg was now satisfied on this matter. voy ; ot
‘ 7. Concerning the length of time taken by Soviet authorities to_
. , process exit visas for Soviet citizens married to foreign nationals — _
(question 3c above), I stated that, in my vupinion, the information “Sy
7 provided by State (in the third enclosure to Mr. Meeker's letter) . .
substantially corresponded to the views expressed in paragraphs 6 and 7 -
of our memorandum to the Commission dated 6 April 1964. Mr. Slawson
| asked if it would be possible to elaborate paragraph 7 of our memorandum
of 6 April by providing 2 statistical breakdown of the cases on which our
statements were based. ] indicated that this could be done. .
, 8. At this point Mr. Slawson stated that as a result of our discussion _
he felt that the question of possible inconsistenciés had been resolved. oe
- However, he asked that «e send a brief written reply to the Commission's

letter of 3 July 1964 embodying the substance of what [had said concerning
the basis for statements included in our 6 April 1964 memorandum. [This
would include the gist of the draft reply to the Commission which I showed -
to C/SR on 8 July plus an elaboration of our statements concerning Soviet
; visa applications. ] ,
. 9. Mr. Slawson indicated that he would be sending parts of his report
‘ dealing with the Sovict inteHigence services to CIA for checking as to
their accuracy. ‘He did nut say when this would ocaar.
10. After concluding the meeting with Mr. Slawson, I yead Volume 52
of the transcript cf testimony before the Commissiom. TjGs included the
reinterview of Marina OSWALD. - :
; ‘Lee H. Wigren
C/SR/Ci/Research ,
. , : = 3 - . . . .
. . we, «“ ‘ Co 7 reid
a . SEGRET ae A i 24 r

## Page 4

13-00000 . . .
- 0) Oo Swe nau LO, __ pe X Sov. ach. ear ve , a

oo ~ Siecle Saye yee — cleo 724 vise npphinferis |
7 . ° - lle «fe abseex -f ems fo act Soy ngs: ;
© De Se poet sw EG eG fm oni
. @) rw Co joes cb KA GSivedts 4 St Sev vtens
; — . a ; ore ae To Ce
tg OE bl Ge fem Powe
“ai it | ES: COPY, Ael- LFTs Oe
Al (6 XAA2~2722 | , , as AG TNE -

## Page 5

13-00000
f ors tet. Qore. yoo. a f (12 chap, 1, Stun tl fonts, . 4
"eee _ f- .
te Lo ut ot freee ~ Syiree- ©? oul cf LU . , us
a ete ore b- tle tech Lr aol aw Gal mo,
| i AP OLE Me pny hol hm
ae : - 2 2 Fae, f (Lee hay I fo 4 2 er ee fare hep
: . : . . i
: - se ew Zz: ve fe tee Fs re oy & ele a) luk. : n
, : — Les a. or Sn <3 ot he ee ila Metin on mera 7
. ' .

## Page 6

*No text detected on this page*

## Page 7

13-00000
: fiver bic fh ace fw. i, 2 -/ “7 t G eo. [- 7t- €7 i Rey ot C .
i b:,. and awd, ‘ bn
### : “A .

Ga
} ~ horas 4: a wee -> f- a] proses A cl, i! on f
o | “, -
eo, N i ° ' ? .
v cae —_ O ’ Ce ieee / ete whe ey fF LLG... : ‘ /
re i oe cA . .
. c t .
[lode4. —_ ty yes] , ‘
— a) fp /
{o ; | a f.. ff... Z Lt fle ed weed pu rue ise fal .
Fim. Ll, - .
RL RY RI I I I A a re - . :
| ~16 bare Aa 14 ha : | | Oo )
hte lad *. . foo MAO vw ee : ;

## Page 8

13-00000 . . 5
. , . - : .

## Page 9

*No text detected on this page*

## Page 10

13-00000 . a ok
a - CASE : SCT Cl THAVEL © PROCEED VISA .
: 1. American.vonan who met and merried x na Ann . .
; 2, Awerican student — , a x - ; Po :
S.  Awerican student or turist oO x . _ Oo
| bes Rserean corresporcent ) J x! 2. ry
. Te Italian student ; _ 9? x. , :
8. italian student ? x :
_ Ge Italian student ? - x a
"10. Iranian returnee ? x
11. = Hest Cerzan student J x ; fee 5 .
| 12. Swedish student Vv x eter bos
13.  Ewedish student J x noe oe |
Ws. Suedish businessman J x ‘anton
15. Swedish student - av ; eT .
| 16. American teacher ? 2 , a /
17. Auericanbusinessman oe J ? ) ’
18. Prenchran on trip ts EcH; student? ? ? ° |
| - 19 Chilean residing and working ioscou ? 2 . : , . Co
: 20. italian student ? ? : . :
21, Finnish student | 2. ? -
226 Soparently Greek; ceta‘ls unimown | ? 2 .
. 23. ‘American tevrist (urbalanced, tuss- Jf d 4 sonths ;
: 7 fan-born father vnder FSI survey) — mo,
, 2h. Italian communist tosrnalist J J oe
. 25, Swedish student : i 2 to
26. American businessman J : J - few sonths a

## Page 11

13-00000
: : e. . . :
. TOTAL CASES: 26 — . 7 oe a
FOMEIGIER LEFT ULSR WITEAT SOVIET SPOUSE De nn —
a tol BAS AME IneSano. D to
: _ Stef nnn CELATI suciicare ; ee
; [EELLI!ZO%% Giovanni _
a7 Iraniav VECuiG Stepan G. Doe, . oe ,
2 L SMPAESCOS Lurt ; ey
! { / Dyce egy : . .
: \preass {3L2LE:T74¢ Gunnar i. ‘ .
: * /LEIDAEL Hugo a
: (THELIN Wits . a ,
: NOT KUOWH WHETHER THEY LIFT USSR TOGETHER So a ) .
i vs CLEPRMAN Edgar ) } oe ,
, .”. <PEXDILL C. Grant 2 ; ,
i CAM %.~ CRUZ OCAIZO Alyare : . a ;
i Jfefa. GRIECO Ruggizro .
i r eee Seem “LAVIEKALA Asser : : .
“wii LYMBOURIDES achillefs .
### * SOVIET SPOUSE ACCOMPANTED FOLEICIER . , . ,

, : . Js r PACKLER Allen .iavic
: Jfitw SCOGNAMIGLIC Harlo a
p. cate o. KRONSJIO Toa .
H oe SAITOR John (but nete that he wanted to take her out with him orfer |.
f to their marriaze, since she was still technically x:rried to
! : ! . ‘Someone else, o:t coviets refuse exit visa, amd ne had to retura
: LO later te xarry ter and then await grenting of exit visa in erder a
i. ar to bring fer o-t.) STON SEGSARN REET 3

## Page 12

13-00000
Re ee SOVIET SPOUSE Ts
oo 1, Stepndeslasidy | an Fo a
_ ‘  """ "po net as of three years after narriage ;
" ¥irseh yes Jumow oo a
Qlsen. yes under Smo. . 7: .
re ‘Mielson = - yes 6-7 woe dee eRe ccetecg -
Sg - Hegarty — no not as of i months after marriage So, -
4 Tyeker yes 10 years . ee ee
| Bassani no . not as of 3 months after maxriag#e.- © : _
. mo Celati . mo - +. ey stb .
oe ; ° - . . Belifingona - yes Il'mo. BA Oe:
Yemikh a ae cot
i Settin - - yes ‘at least a year ae ° . .
oe ; Johansson yes 9mo, Visa toox either 6 weeks or 7 xonths.
* Nurdenstam yes 7 mo. or roré = 2. 7 7 a

: ; ; ; Lundahl no not as of 3 xonths after marriage . 7
: The Lin yes 11 mo. or nore
: Pendill yes : °
: (Frerchnan) yes married 1959 or &); out as of 21 Hay 1962. :
Cruz Ceaxpo no not as of 32 years after aarriage - _
‘ Crieeo - ?
i Lavikkala yes :
j ; Lysbourides ? ; ; .
¢ Packler yes 13 no. Visa took 6 months. .
: Seornaniglio yes 9 MO. .
‘ Xrons jo yes married prior July 19%2, Applied for Norwegian visas
for period 7 duly ~ 20 Angust 1962. To go fron there ~
: | to Sweden permarently. “Supoosedly did.
7 Sander yes 5 mo. a
### TNE FOR SCVIET SPSUSE TO GET VISA .

Known: = Fackler 6 Md. °
: Scognaniglio 9 mo. . “A
; Sardor - S mo. i @
; Johansson 7 mo. or about 6 weeks s
Implied: Firseh not over 9 no. ,
i _ Olsen _ & 8 5S moe :
} Nielson - sf 6-7 mo.
| Eellinzena ne 11 no. , :
| Tucker ten years : - ’
i ; ‘ Bettin at least 2 year
; Nurdenstam 7 mo. or more >
1 Thelin 1) so. or nore . a . ;

## Page 13

13-00000
sep Ted! rae -' ‘In three cases there wae a lapse of several: acnths betsbon appli- a oa
oo. - : Stee cation arid Sssvance of the Soviet exit vise (five months in one case, o ~
, : - six dn the second, ard rifne in the third). In another case. the kestern a
oo husband wasreluctant to lerve the USER without his Soviet wifes He: ——~—_____.. 7 ‘
"oom { . _.° did-se-some six months after the wedding enly tecause the Soviet author= 7
. ° ; . - ities told hin that ber exit application eovld not be processed until ~ Sot
jf. he'bad left. The visa was issued- only sbout six weeks after his de- ”
‘ | ; _ parture, out it may have been applied for wien they were narried or a ;
at any tine during the next six nonths. ° , . co 4
{ In four other eases it is possidle ‘eo infer asprexinate tim re
; i linits for the granting ef an exit visa. Gnz was granted within four
i to five nontas, the secon within six to sever. xonths, the third witain _ ‘
: i nine months, and the foertn within eleven months. .In three additional ;
i cases visa issuance tocz a nin of seven, eleven, ant twelve montas .
; 1 inisaum of Bt
### H :

respectively. : . :
{ Jo
:

## Page 14

13-00000
CO a ; oo RES ;
### ; CASE - WARRTAGE DATE = APPLIDATION «= APRIVED IMWESR =”

ar —— STERM-2ASLAVSKIX Arlene 26 aug 610s Soon after =o vers
/ : RMRSCH Leonard latter May 61 US = Feb 62. i ob
i OLSEN Clerk 30 Jan 60 U3 = 21 May 60 ae a
: MELSON Philip Fed or Mar 62 varies Sopt 62 po.
| | HEGARTY Themes = 28 May SD net out yet Sept 59. |
; ‘TUCKER Rebert . 1913 US 2953 _ a" et
BASSANI Luelane 10 May 62 imnediately net out yet Ang 61: -
| ; CELATI Amileare ; . a expoctad Jum: 62° Lo ;
BELLINZOW GLovanni Aug 61 | Italy = July 62°.)
### YEVNIKH . | |

| BSTTIN Armlf July 61 inxediately net eut yet apring/
JOHANSSON Kurt 9 July a “ er Jan 62 Spoden = April, 62 ,
ar NURDENSTAM Gonnar Aug 61 er prior _ Svoden, = Mar 92 .
| | LOMDAHL Hugo 21 Dee 61 net yot out Mar 62 -
po THELIN Nils nid-6l or prier inmediately Sweden - spring 627:
; LEHRMAN Edgar 28 Mar 63 ‘Sooediataly : .
i °  PENDILL C. Grant | ald 50's er prier | US = nid 50's
| _ AXEXXP2KZ Frenchman 1959 er 60 | ‘Franee - as WEY,
! CRUZ OCAMPO Alvare esrly 1947 nid 47 net yet eut dug su ee
, | aad Meaiore Baler z |
. LAVIEKALA Asser fall 99 er prier iM tnd = 4
C - paCKIER Allen 17 Feb 62 bug 62? Itely - Maren 63 | 7
| SCOGNAMIGLIO Marie hug 60 Dee 60 Italy - 6 May GL
: Za. moxsuf Tom prier’ Jul 62 . Norway -7 Fl 622
: * - SANDOR John - _ 2 Nev 57 funediataly §- US- 31 Mar 58 ,

## Page 15

13-00000
. - . an - . . ats eee ;
-N . . . * . . cw ro .

7 GOTAL CAZES: 26°" a a  <ihs 2 ay ee ae
| ess BS Ie eH,
an ne FOREIGIER LEFT USSR WITHOUT SOVIZT EPOCSE ne
ot Knowns = STERN-ZASLAVSXTY Arlene , so
° | ‘KIRSCH Leonard . ; Soot.
 j . OLSEN Clark of
- NIELSON Philip 7 to -

; _. GELATI Anileare | oO 20 en
: - BELLINZONA Glovannt oe, se re .
JOHANSSON Kurt oO Lo -
THBLIN Nils iy : - ee oo
### 3 . LO DSYAGAIG ES 2 TOD : :

; NOT KEOWH VHETHER THEY LIFT USSx TOCETHER ;
LEHRMAN Edger a
PELDILL C. Grant ; : :
| CRUZ OCAKPO Alvare .
H IAVIEKALA Asser .
LYMBOUKIDES Achillefs
### | SOVIET SPOUSE ACCOMPANIED FURZIGIER

i |
; | PACKLER Allen David ° 1
joSesiMGGhIO-terte— . , i
i SAND John (but note that be wanted to take her out sith hin prier |
i te their marriage, since che was still technicelly narried te : °
; soneone else, but Seviets refused exit visa, ad he had to return P
later te marry her and then evait granting of exit vise in erder i ,
te bring her out.) ;
, MTD HZSTO i
preu0g] ROSULi oN :
### CUITIT JTASATISVE-NUGIS —«- SUNOU

| @IWOZS ISTAOS_LONLIN Lz21 wRIOTIUOs : .
i . _ -g& §SASYO TVIOL

## Page 16

13-00000
CASE ae VAGUS LATE APPLIBATION «= #2 VED INVEST © :
CTEW-ZASLAVSKIY Arlene 26 hug €1 Soon after : Sever - |
pe OLSEN Clirk 30 Jan 60 . w-aMy6
i : NIELSON Philip Feb or Var 62 Paris - Sept 62;
FEGARTY Thomas 28 ey 59°, " not out yet Sept 59 5 :
. | "- WUCKER Robert 193° * 2 > oa
| PASSASI LeeLane 10. May_€1 ‘fmediately not out yet due 61
; CELATI Amfleare expected Jue 62 .
: EELLINZONA Giovanni ee CL italy - Jdcly 62 oe
### : YEVNIEH : .

4 €2
PETTIN Armlf 7 > duly 61 inxediately not o:% yet spring/
i JOHANSSON Fort 9 doly 61 " or Jan €2 Sweden — April 620 : a
{ . Visa xicFeb .
2 ; ropes 4 hug € Sure da -_if 2 . . ‘
WHDENCTAK Gunnar Aug Cl or prior Swe 3 Fee
i LONDAEL Rugo 21 Dee 61 not yet oct Mar 62 .
a SERLIN ils cid-6l or prior imeciately § Sveden - spring 622 ™
of LEHRMAN Edgar 28 Kar 632s Amediately
PUIDILL C. Grant nid 50's or prior US - nid 50!s :
; . ; May 62 ; ;
: AXIZAZE2IZ Frenchman 1959 er & Freree ~ as of 21/ _
| CRUZ CCAMPO Alvare early 1517 aid -U7 ret yet out Avg 52 |
| . GRIECO Ruggiero )
- | Finlova - ¢

i LAVINZRLA Esser fall 59 or prior he ° ‘ to
LYYSOUIDES schillefe - 4
G — pacrEr allen 17 Fes 62 hug 62? Italy - rarch 63 .
7 SCCGHNAICGLIC Fario Aug 60 Bee 60 Italy -6 tay 6L
2a — moxsof Tom prior Jul £2 , -Nerway - 7 dul €27 , :
. C — SANCOR John. 2 Nov 57 innediately Ti+ 31 Mar 58
 & hontnweaid eth Se .

## Page 17

13-00000
. . . _ . .- . ; : ~ - . . ; .
oj 7 1, Paragraph.6,0f our memorandum of 6 April 1964 was a - .
: . response to question. #3 of your. memorandum of 12 March 1964 extitied: a oy
. y Questions Posed by State Department Files. That question read as Sollowe: i:
i "At the time that L.H. OSWALD and M. OSWALD left ~ a .
: , Russia for the United States was it legal and normal under Soviet law oa -
; _ and practice for a Russian national married to an American te ve able ; . .
. to accompany him back to his homeland? Was the rapidity «lit which
L2H. OSWALD was able to accomplish this and Marina's return in ‘ ;
any way unusual?“ . ~
} s 2. Our reply addressed itself to the legality and normality of Soviet .
i : citizens accompa nying ({.e.: departing simultaneously with) foreign spouses :
| out of the USSR. It was based ona review of 26 case, of which 16 involved :
; ) J Americans, in which foreign nationals married Soviet citizens iz the USSR.
fo In only four of these 26 cases, did the Soviet wife leave the Sovfier Umfon in the |
: company of her-hueband. In one of these four cases, an Italian Ceammunist :
‘ an / Party member married ;

## Page 18

13-00000
. - vm . - . : — ot . ; . . ; :
po. Party member married in the USSR and by prevailing upon the liallan Embassy | wo,
, qo. to hold up Itallan vieas for Soviet seamen, was able to arrange for hie wife to
fo accompany him to Italy. In two more of the ‘cases, an American met his |
; | o., future wife ona vieit to the USSR, married her on'a subsequent trip, and - |
; | : brought her back to the U.S. No detalis are available on the fourth cace, |.
which involved a Swedish student who married a Soviet student and apparently
y brought her out with him. ; |
- | ~ 3. In 14 of the remaining cases, a foreign husband (in one case a wife)

{ i ;
i. ;
departed alone, In another case the wife preceded her husband because he
i |
i had been jailed a manth or two previously for violation of travel regulations ' ,
i and in 7 additional cases the saquence is not known. |
| -  @. The information tn the third enclosure to Mr. Meeker's letter }
I regarding length of time taken by Soviet authorities to procees visa applications -
of Soviet wives of American citizens substantially corresponds with the | ‘
: i . conclusions which we expressed in paragraph 7 of our tnemorandum of . i
v4 | 6 April 1964. The material from hr. Meeker provides useful additional data =;
; - athe Deg to tos. Lo ° /regarding Sovict visas : ;

## Page 19

13-00000
, 3 - ° ‘vegarding Soviet visa processing, and does act materially alter the cv)
conclusions stated in paragraph 6 of our memorandum. ‘We feel that any ,
| ’ apparent inconsistencies may stem from the different approaches to the ~ :
/ { | problem by the State Department and this Agency. se ae a oe
i . @. 3
' , ‘. 1

## Page 20

. . .. | DRA = % 7949 “y Vly 6% 1 ¥. a
oe 7 ae fp Bros Gaus se ov O% homonscedikey We ogas bt te I
v ned, ° - 262 SAovers 7 211 ) hey L Aide) (rack aad
Jor INGAU S107 _ 4. a yf QO, oe .*
oo ; . Datfn7 9 [jae te Shitoco. SO
| ) A ‘i rat GY A bln da ele. a id cuG sivredlG« -
| Doe ede th av 4: 2 Lat FAL, Bo NéLséN a
MIA ine Soave. KINb 3-9 it, ot cance be teacrclid Wile Gor pacli
_ iD Wn D hon 7 NV cl. thy bron Sesitag’) WY
,  BAbeed om 17 Ms 62 Wet ah, Merry (ELSE
LéA- 79641, 72 Viti sf
. ; FG « gow hs ilar: ced itn aig of Van 33. Se dy jae
. bes J fie were S feat. an Pe Lib ux tis f “y Site $2. Mer br ally,
. Cit LS AMMOYE WV — born (926 — Ce yplege d Moser aj Ae tuntlid
| Pied Wepre. bil cud Oo ete uw 27 Feb é¥

## Page 21

13-00000 ;
a 2 . ° + . Ra , ° .
; ) We aNd G64 t/ jee ,
Oo ) tin, CIA § slede. _ ]
1... :On 9 daly 1964, Mr. W. David Slavsen and 2 representative ef ,
oo , . . cra diseussed the question ef epparent Iineesnsiztencies in material pro- 7 :
sided the Ceamission by CIA and by the Departent, ef State. At that .
a time the question was resolved to Me, Slamzen’s satisfaction, ad it :
: was agreed that CIA would furnish a statistical breakdem ef the cases
‘ i. en whisk CIA based the stetezents in paragrach 7 of its mencrancta of :
; bo, 6 April 196k.
. 4 2. Paragraph 7 ef the 6 April reneracdun acttressed iteelf to the
. i a legality and nernality of Soviet citizens departing the USSR simultane ;
4 eeusly with taeir foreign spevses. Statements were based cn a review
ef 26 eases (ten involving Americans) in whic foreign natienals married.
Seviet eitizens in the USSR. In enly three ef these 26 eases did the.
: a Soviet wife leave the USSR in the company of ker tusband. In two ef the
: i : eases an American met his future wife on a visit te the Seviet Union, oo.
4 married her on a subsequent trip, sod breught her beek te the U.S. Me
| details are available on the third case, witeh imvelved a Swedish student . .
, | whe married a Soviet student and apperently treught her est with him, In . _

## Page 22

13-00000
; a mo parted alotie. Un ene were ef the 23, the uffe preceded her husband . ‘
Bt Eye beeause he had’been jailed « nenth or tee previously fer vielation ef J,
| ; 7 . travel regulations, and In the seven ether eases the sequeme is not nem, - a
. 3. The information in the third enelasure to Mr. Mecker's letter =
. ' regarding length of time taken by Seriet exthorities tc precess visa. tt
e applications 6f Soviet wives of Jacriean eltizems substantially corres- .
i
ponds with the conclusions whieh we exzressed im paragraph 7 of tha our
### H : .

i ; .
. ' . 6 April menerandum. In ekeven ef the % eases, this tine peried is '
| knew fairly definitely er can be trfexred, In three eases it tock from . |
: five te nine months, Inferring ia the ether eight cases, three took .. ;
J! sbeut efx menths, two more were issued in net mare than nine to eleven :
: nenths, and three teck a minimum ef seven te twelve months. Apparent
ineensisteneies between thése statistics ani these previded by the State .
Departaent undoubtedly arice from a differene im appreach by the State ; ‘
Departaent and CIA. | .

## Page 23

13-00000 a a, ; 5
. . . . ~, ; : . . . . :
| In three cases there was « Inge of several mexths between. so :
, j ' spplisatien and isscance ef the Soviet exit visa (five months in ene , .
i] 2 oof ee... ‘ 5 . , :
. 4 Ee did se sens six months efter the wedding enly beeause the Soviet Se ——
~f : eutherities teld bim that her exi* explication eculd net he precessed .
1 until he had left. The visa was fesned only ebeut six weeks after his
, i ceparture, tut it may have beer ayglfied fer when they were married er _
at any tine curing tre m=t six amt. ‘ :
. po In feur other eases it 1% pecuihile te infer appreximate tine lixits |
: fer the granting of an exit visa. Ome was granted within four to five 4
Py nenths, the second within six te ssvmn aenths, the third within nine :
i menths, and the fourt: witain eZevwn meaths, In three additional cases ,
: : . Vise issuance took a ninimcm ef sever, eleven, and twelve wenths res- 7
: pestively. ot .

## Page 24

13-00000
. os a Mirerllancouc rites on Sovd nanwd & i ; 7
- Ae $F zn SLAVEKIY hes Aev hurled has Lend ae

So “a Harold Bégninn te bead cate ” yet fine
7 oh YSSK. Q Oct 62 : . oo
, mo Lumard even t fecde has nived uw OSHA, Mag, | |
. i. -_ Cine to VIR %4.12.60 if been ising (ha. Eb .
7 oe jh contincng feo lathes hh “LS. Married oo
Wha Aorrniled I Vb judCla Yarn lnerilh \ tech. .
Meal, Caywa his plig lt gad 4 a os
| z , to dev gots Shy te ou lcL4 cenpoeacd 7 etlea
| “sce [ONDE Vi A242 ucthmatle utd por lignite Ce
A Ea Meteor Avipatels A- 30%, 31.862. |
sagan Lean Man AG egehauge aa at chiteon 4} os
. . The of femoy der lo clbes Sell. MA A AK ovr
ee ten old bast oy ort whastint at eller een

## Page 25

13-00000_
7 o ; , pauls ta | Lr - Z manage entitn, gel ° | -
patents Ceurmnd would potccorfone
aap Ao comment pr Aepoile 7 bel ively
3. aaunen a the edbole We Ll to, tetddling - .
mG gata tee lad AR And 7 puth a heglt.
Misco HF, 327 , Nhat per ; a a
Lee Harvey OSWhlD , pf{trhact 1 DAA - 2684 3,
| ol- BRIRGE Fob 62. : Oo
| Nils Bi (HELIN, Aitdesl Ly th ause aidial of
bbe ude chife lita th. (Heeg bikes, ,
— Ticrisrat-l SH tentact Apt le Anr 2. ere bite .
Oo ec rot erat rt 7 wef Runa KBB TON). ES eo Senge,
| mdb “fau aha. SEREBRENN/ Kova, wWle Vag
' TASS granelist AEPROMISE. (201- 274504-)
: seiried ful, Ol ys jelly tei te oe
Oo Agvridiy. Mu Apt GL ht sunt Aji -

## Page 26

13-00000 -
ne pcrvilid 9 vb, Staton Antpeele, PIS ba Ct
agli ty paged Ao fey fennel wank
a he OssAU HE iS 6-62 is Yr clere Gueude pF. ,
| : Vail, WAL Ow bk de pbwud white, Hane fr- :
; : dined ht Cepek acd A ee, 9 te i, . .
: Lite. Sov frbee ‘aurprisyay4 Atek b Lar . she Said.
an Hua baud Aad Aol bead "leo ec. Affe cull, ;
. | . ellen Lar outs Yee Got cut ee Cn than flr o |
. , (her Z - Due look YW pal ow no fat et . «
oo | They yn dra Catt JL, . D Nex provetsie Cent a
7 ae beyr half he haids o/, Lat ihe, So - | :
be It tw 62 tile. abeatiyy tuclid ; ee
: fide t. Meu be. Mtn y y AL. Livka. td “Aid feb Uae Og
be seul col get ba, Yrs delays d. Pha a8
a heave celled Ut An kib “pes bbG Y Adicts 7

## Page 27

13-00000 oe | .
0 GOA a: a
— Benugr- Wokoedstam. Crag Che % 10-61
ved i tease Ardent. CMaried Mibilya
, = - Netshinska H, Sitonusf tee di Ae hering rd: a .
a a a thylla MY sae bhai gol wie Feb
_ So i 20/207 . ; 7 . «
oo  Ufhiaotion. Lawyer tora “Us Laat wile feblid tw. :
me Nl Kditounk feted. Kove at pr tyht of
: — K Row a Aatnevnare Koewvrke vb 26(- 276 $67, a
Iduntet Mlirprte guide ot fet Mothva, —
| | Kaen Meseg evith (sit). Sha bre Ade tut = |
AG Ung could mdrg, [6p tx ley 7, Slo

## Page 28

13-00000 oo : ;
SO ON ee pee
 hvoreed from BLK OV tay 697. Vibbouge
a fav $7, Lived Cha 01 hag 2) Ob AGL
lah iongl CY departerr fem CMR
a SS Aad appar Arte fz ge dey pvax. fr Be
- 1 6 Mo wee befove pblarwuaig dt OSLR | Nov ST

, : Sov gout gas JS perinit ren Z olay UVILR °
| es | My -bualid ote
| Lint $9 SRB)? arhirslid ty eding SS Jee |
— WMK a0 F VALE 7 |
7 : Asser oy Jouko LAVIKALA, finn ryl, Lew? sLient, Jo. |
der gb at unrkunbr dat. A igen KB |

## Page 29

13-00000
Oo Mex Dad LpcwléR US etizen , gnanted = , 7 a
| A ; Abo. L Yovi f- (gt (fo a 2o/ Ado oe | |
Landa © cMawiwd RELENKOV t0/- BBB» .
: AL LYMBCURIDES ; anid Aelita Boripvra. , .
. 7 DYOWINE er DEM bre Hag 57. 20(- 3/2213, |
. | 7 ecGiAM | CLIG  wtA probrotlg ty hu dled . Vga PC/
, ia bi jt Judd fi wn th hypoth, Mot
| gthliny be Hip Arf “yy “Le, *, Sry Atel ,
lieu ye offect, Smee set od nte dey KOR
Aolyn ORANE - Po BISON , Abt ola But serontest- oe
eo “Gym Maucbesitr, ban ete.. SUiacle wig LUSSR,
. a Me khailovis RISANOVA ov AB Juve (gah?) |
bo ; Ff ad .
a iyered 72 e. seats, Ne veausbed egos cone

## Page 30

13-00000 ti.
—— Mego on PRLAKR—  Ofela sipped, Told lime
0 Shame Col: rach Ae bead be Td, thal a
: | Me ible LB Mure Lhe totwtiy. " | - | |
lyahe Ochmpo gon o} Gfee Dui Zé WSK , ane :
S Sev bide 1 1ESS iNft (biauberusted da
ce Ayrt 44 (as jruvole st Y th jis alempt 2 |
. . ' change Av Gow fishin i 1c Haryed Me | | ;
oo | Sf te bass is Maik wap bi-aen ad Liter Jun

## Page 31

 Alenso MM jin Meteo marie & Lidiya, a
- , : AEMIRIPD/ i aied Use Ka gurl getty gillcdent 7 7 , a

han Uaty Lega eo, she Cilled t deay a Yer ,
oe : fy hKine t Cuvrtg! 0) wa K6B aks lirte vere! phe Le oe
: Wout Minn ok kl d Me tiave v [Maty we |
—— FOLDERS NOT @yeCKED. ¢ | :
Uf 776) ~62. , “
oo LUNDA L kiidiga. hee LELENKOVA 201, 582758 -

## Page 32

13-00000 |
4° * -$e6°201-294750'on Tamera S.KUNGUROVA,,
|“ TainsiPaStepanovns KUNGIROVA, A roisance developed tetween them and NIELSON
fe | became detertiined to metry her,which he finally did in the:spting of 19622 +
3 4 ve oe ‘His family did everything in their pover to discourage this romance and Sohw- Do,
" ne Hafnes of the State Deptartment received letter from MIELSON's father re BO
| affair.Not seeking help but advice on what to do. 7 eo
. 7 NIELSON later received letter from his father in fall 1960 giving in
: Getails the contents ofa conversation father had had with John Hanes of State.
Hanes stated that: | oo | :
. . a. All American-Soviet marriages had ‘turned out to be unsuccessful,
' . by The Soviets never let one of their nationals out of the country under SD
Po such circumstances unless the person had been recruited as a gpy. :
i c.The Soviets will pretably not given NIELSON 2 viea(he tried unsuccess-
i . fully all summer and fall 1960 and in 1961 to get Sev visa),

## Page 33

13-00000 a
Ee Repastennc(tio mirried.a British diplomat in the. 19iot\nes thie
7 : o 7 ' to says"thst of the vonen who: bave narvied foreigners must have agreed
7 fat one tine or another to carry out some sort of apy work for the Soviets, =
"1 Otherise, they would not have been given pettilséton to merry foreigners, = |
_ - =" for even the marriage certificate has. fo be issued by the secret police." ot
_ oe Nora,hereelf,was recruited by State Security through coereten and only nm ae
| _ allowed to leave the country by agreeing to work for Seaket State Security. — ”
. 5 This she never asa eine out of the country, she broke completely with . ,
; . the Soviets and it 1s presumed that she has furnished information on .
, | , , that organization to the British Services. (AL Spied for Stalin® by .
| ' Nora Murtay). . 7+ ;
: _ Petr DERYABIN, State Security officer who defected in 1954,has this |
to say ebout the Soviet women who have contact with or who marry foreigners: .
| Soviet women associating with foreign men will be recruited by State Security
: when the association is first begua,cr after it has developed,or when plans = ,
, a . for marriage have been made, " Even if only ot of these. vomen are 100% , .
: . loyal State Security vorkers,and the others work leas loyally,it is still
. considered a vorthwhile operation.No woran known to be. anti-Soviet would .
. - ever ba given a visa to leave the country,even if she were narried to en .
| ; | ambassador.The Soviets instruct all persons in this category to make romarks . . '
. against the Soviet Union when abroad, but these remarks are not te be too strong, a
; _ hor are they nade for publication" by press or radio." . -
; a In the early 1% 0s, when anyoung American was thinking of narrying an ;
7 INTURIST guide, his father contacts a knowledgeable official of the State
. i | . Department who made the following rezarks: a | 7 a
o£ 1, All Aferican-Soviet marrisges had turned out to be unsuccesful

## Page 34

SC 7 7 It is believed that the Counter intelligence Directorate, KRiipint - - a, se
a (Kontrrazvedyvatelnoye upravpeniye-ERU), “of the "KCB nftiates operations cue eB
a oe . against ‘foreigners irside the USSR, When ‘the operation / leads outside the
ee USSR into foreign countries,i.e., when the. probatlé recruitments have teen =
, SO MRD Tt ae So re a . so. eee
a oe -  achfeved,and the persons in question ‘leave the USSR, the operation is thén , ‘
) turned over to the Foreign Intelligence Directorate (Inostrennoye ppravieniye- OO,
7 INU) Wae- continues the operation until such tine aa it 1s terminated. oe

## Page 35

13-00000 | a
i “Jon SANDOR - M4 and proposed to Viktoriya KCCHTACTA ‘in 1956, b oo. . .
; 7 "Nad to Leave USSR beford tley could eet married, -leturned in 1957 |. -
a ard married her Nov. Arrived together in US in Harch 1958. rs .
. . of
; : , . . ‘

## Page 36

13-00000 ;
4 rm OL pad-f9'9.  AWe Oot 0i7i Hl- VEIGEG 2-08 Se
A an ho G9 she nts chi / ly epi dOrd
y AEOMRTY Sfror, V- Zo Mag 07 Aide bel LY phn a _
(VA MIVG . (ee ut bf zta /4.20. } oo,

## Page 37

13-00000 _
ao 4 a z a
OR SIS 8 ES EIS gg EI BO SMA VHF pe
SG  SBORISOVA, Matalya (201-311072) - married. to Itelih Scognasiglia whom
vote g ree eee ae -ghe Jeft.. Living with aiother Italian, | ,
pe nr ‘citizen. She bas 201 file, See SR/6/BIo..
fb RBEENoWA, =» marred to LONMDAHLS 2010332736
. io op = ER, Natalya ~ married Gunnar NORDENSTAM: from ae co
2 ; oo _  Bothenburg. Now living in Jutteborg. 7 ae
+ _._ SEREBRENTKOVA, Tamara = Married ALE PROMISE/] ~ SEE SR2
| SHOLOVA, Tanara - Leningrad Univ, born ca. 1936-37.
i _ , Former INTURIST guide. My records —
4 _- do not indicate to whom she is
f a . married, oo . | |
ae LYMBOURIDI, Aelita Borisoma - Born Sudarxxeyion Yalta , 29 May 1934. “
| nee DYOMENA Married to Achillefs LYYSOURIDES ,
. i aka DEMIKA . , _ An August 1959, 201-312213.

---

*Document converted by JFK Files PDF2Markdown converter at 2025-03-19 16:38:03*
*OCR: Enabled*
*Quality: high*
*GPT-assisted: No*
*Conversion time: 52.76 seconds*

